Bridging Innovation System Research and Development
Studies: challenges and research opportunities

Bengt-Åke Lundvall1

, CBS, Aalborg University, Denmark,

Jan Vang, Copenhagen Institute of Technology, Aalborg University, Denmark
KJ Joseph, Centre for Development Studies (CDS), India
Cristina Chaminade, Circle, Lund University, Sweden

1. Introduction
This paper links innovation system analysis to economic development. Both fields are
young and interdisciplinary. The origins of research on innovation systems goes back to
the early 1980s (Freeman 1982, Lundvall 1985, Freeman 1987) although it links to
several predecessors such as Babbage (1832, 3rd edition), List (1941) or Marshall (1965).
Development economics, on the other hand, took off in the 1940s (Rosenstein-Rodan
1943) but, since then, it has been going through so many dramatic changes that yet
cannot be characterised as a ‘mature’ field.
In the recent years, there has been a renewed interest on applying the innovation system
concept in developing countries. However, some critical questions remained unanswered:
Is innovation system a useful concept for understanding and explaining what goes on in a
developing country? Can it be used as a tool and a framework for agents and agencies in
charge of designing public policy and business innovation strategies? The assumption
behind this paper is that we can answer a conditional ‘yes’ to both of these questions and
1 Corresponding author, bal@business.aau.dk 2 It is useful to keep in mind, that the innovation system concept originated from an analysis of ‘national’
innovation systems (Freeman 1982, Freeman 2004) and that the regional and sectoral systems have been
both inspired by and reacted to this original formulation. Arguably, the national level is the one that

4

in the first part of this paper we try to specify the conditions and we do so in a dialogue
with critiques developed within the community of evolutionary and development
scholars.
Another important question is how the approach fits into the historical and current trends
in development economics. In the second part of the paper we give a brief assessment of
how development economics has evolved and we draw some lessons for a research
strategy. We will argue that the crisis of the first generation of development economics
that was represented by scholars such as Nurkse, Myrdal, Hirschman, Singer and Sen has
left a void in development economics that cannot be filled neither by mainstream
neoclassical economics nor by ‘new growth theory’. We see the innovation system
approach as a serious candidate to fill this void.
The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we review the concept of
innovation system (in dialogue with other alternative concepts like national learning
systems), the different forms of studying innovation systems and the critical dimensions
to consider when studying innovation systems, particularly in developing countries.
Section 3 reviews the recent evolution of Development Economics, pointing out to the
main weakness of this discipline, particularly when it comes to the analysis of the factors
underlying under-development. Section 4 proposes and discusses how innovation system
research can contribute to development economics and vice-versa. The paper concludes
highlighting the main research gaps in innovation systems and development and proposes
a future research agenda in this topic.

2. Innovation systems research
2.1. The narrow and broad definition of innovation systems
The initial work on innovation systems by Freeman (1987), Lundvall (1992) and Nelson
(1993) operated at the national level. It inspired the work on regional (Asheim and
Gertler, 2004), sectoral (Malerba, 2002, 2004) technological (Carlsson and Stankiewitz

5

1995) and corporate levels (Granstrand 2000). Common for these contributions was that
they deviated from the linear approach to technological progress and regarded
innovations at micro, meso and macro level as a driving force behind growth. It went
beyond the narrow confines of product and process innovation, focusing on interactive
learning and emphasized inter-dependence and non-linearity wherein institutions play the
central role (Joseph 2006).
Almost from the beginning, innovation system research has encompassed two different
perspectives, a narrow one linking innovation to science and a broader one encompassing
learning, innovation and competence building (Lundvall 2007). While acknowledging the
different scales in which the innovation system concept can be applied, the following
discussion will be mainly focused on the national level – national innovation systems
(NIS)2
.
NIS in a narrow perspective, in tune with the earlier analyses of national science systems
and national technology policies (Mowery and Oxley 1995), aimed at mapping indicators
of national specialization and performance with respect to innovation, research and
development efforts and science and technology organizations. In contrast, the broader
approach to NSI takes into account social institutions, macro economic regulation,
financial systems, education and communication infrastructures and market conditions as
far as these have impact on learning and competence building process (Gu and Lundvall
2006). It links the micro behaviour to the system level in a two-way direction. Changes
at the system level are seen as outcomes of interactions at the micro level whereas the
system shapes the learning, innovation and competence building at the micro level.
The bearing of the broad and narrow definitions of innovation system in a developing

country context may be explained by considering the distinction between a STI (Science-
Technology-Innovation) mode and a DUI (Doing Using and Interacting) mode of

innovation as articulated by Jensen et al (2007) and Lundvall (2007). The STI mode of
2 It is useful to keep in mind, that the innovation system concept originated from an analysis of ‘national’
innovation systems (Freeman 1982, Freeman 2004) and that the regional and sectoral systems have been
both inspired by and reacted to this original formulation. Arguably, the national level is the one that
illustrates more clearly the differences between the narrow and the broad notion of innovation system that
will be discussed in this paper.

6

innovation, in tune with the narrow definition of innovation system, focuses on
innovations based upon R&D-efforts. This suggests an innovation model which is based
on experimentation (typically in labs) formalisation, and codification of the identified
knowledge. However, the STI mode constitutes only one of the pillars of the learning and
innovation process. Much learning, especially of tacit and localised knowledge, is
through the DUI mode that refers to learning at the job as employees face on-going
changes that confront them with new problems and as well learning taking place in an
interaction with external customers. The DUI mode, given its focus on interactive
learning through structures and relationships, is in tune with the broader definition of
innovation system.
We will argue that narrow definitions of the national innovation system are of limited
relevance when it comes to understand the problems of less developed economies.
Actually they are misleading when it comes to inform innovation policy strategy
everywhere. This may be illustrated by the debate on ‘innovation paradoxes’ for Europe
as a whole and in many individual countries, where investment and progress in science
does not match innovation outcomes and economic performance (Lundvall 2007).
But this leaves us with the task to specify what we mean with the ‘broad’ definition.
Broadness and holism are not attractive terms in themselves since they might signal lack
of clarity and precision etc. And there has been a criticism of the broad definitions
pointing out to the difficulties selecting which institutions, organisations and structures
should be included and what could be excluded. An important aim with this paper is to
bring this discussion some steps ahead.
In the box below a number of definitions of (national) innovation systems have been
listed. It is obvious that they have in common first a reference to ‘institutions’ and second
a focus on ‘knowledge’ and/or ‘technology’.

7
Box 1.: Definitions of National Innovation Systems
“... The network of institutions in the public- and private-sectors whose activities and
interactions initiate, import, modify and diffuse new technologies” (Freeman, 1987)
“... The elements and relationships which interact in the production, diffusion and use of new,
and economically useful knowledge... and are either located within or rooted inside the borders
of a nation state”(Lundvall, 1992)
“... The set of institutions whose interactions determine the innovative performance of national
firms” (Nelson and Rosenberg, 1993)
“... The national system of innovation is constituted by the institutions and economic structures
affecting the rate and direction of technological change in the society” (Edquist and Lundvall,
1993)
“... A national system of innovation is the system of interacting private and public firms (either
large or small), universities, and government agencies aiming at the production of science and
technology within national borders. Interaction among these units may be technical, commercial,
legal, social, and financial, in as much as the goal of the interaction is the development,
protection, financing or regulation of new science and technology” (Niosi et al., 1993)
“... The national institutions, their incentive structures and their competencies, that determine the
rate and direction of technological learning (or the volume and composition of change generating
activities) in a country” (Patel and Pavitt, 1994)
“... That set of distinct institutions which jointly and individually contribute to the development
and diffusion of new technologies and which provides the framework within which governments
form and implement policies to influence the innovation process. As such it is a system of
interconnected institutions to create, store and transfer the knowledge, skills and artifacts which
define new technologies” (Metcalfe, 1995)
Source: Niosi, 2002, p. 292

8

Several of the definitions refer to system components and relationships. But a system can
also be defined in terms of what it does (its functions). This alternative approach is the
one proposed by Edquist (2005) and others (Galli & Teubal, 1997; Johnson & Jacobsson,
2003; Liu & White 2001; Rickne, 2000).
These authors, applying the functional approach, argue that the innovation system major
function is to bring forward innovations or to create new knowledge. Scholars in this line
of research define different sub-functions or activities that contribute to this overall
function. Edquist (2005) argues that the lack of agreement on where to draw the lines
around the innovation system makes the concept ‘diffuse’ and that this lack of clarity
constitutes a barrier for further progress toward a more ‘rigorous’ and ‘theoretical’
concept. Rather than defining the system as constituted by organizations it should be
defined by specifying different functions. He lists ten such activities/functions/factors
influencing innovation: Research and development, competence building, formation of
new product markets, articulation of user needs, creation and change of organizations,
networking around knowledge, creating and changing institutions, incubating activities,
financing innovation, and consultancy services (Edquist, 2005).
It is true that all the listed factors may be seen as contributing to or being media for
innovation. And the point made that the same activity may be organized differently in
different national systems is certainly relevant at least for some of the activities. We
would also agree that such lists may be used as check-lists for governments to make sure
that the innovation policy pursued does not become too narrowly defined.
But to conclude that agreeing on such a list is the most useful way to ‘create rigour’ and
scientific progress might not be correct. Several other activities/functions/factors
influencing innovation could be listed (five candidates that might enter the top ten as
‘factors influencing innovation’ are: competition, openness to international trade and
capital flows, labor market dynamics, social welfare systems and ‘social capital’). Saying

9

that further research will help us converge on the right ones is not a useful response to
this selection problem3
.

While it might be unsatisfactory to define the innovation system in terms of its
organizational components and their interactions we find it equally unsatisfactory to do it
by listing activities or functions. The third way being proposed here is to focus upon the
innovation process and to draw upon innovation theory based upon stylized facts and
rooted in an evolutionary perspective.
It should be pointed out that we are interested in linking innovation and macroeconomic
performance. We do not see it as the function of the national innovation system to
maximize the amount of innovation. We are interested in understanding both how
innovation takes place and how it is transformed into macroeconomic performance. This
corresponds to the perspective characterizing the original work on innovation systems
(Freeman 1982, Freeman 1987 and Freeman and Lundvall 1988).
On this basis we would propose the following definition:
“The national innovation system is an open, evolving and complex system that

encompasses relationships within and between organisations, institutions and socio-
economic structures which determine the rate and direction of innovation and

competence building emanating from processes of science based and experience
based learning.”

The definition highlights three important issues:
1. That innovation and learning will reflect the combination of prevailing institutions
and the socio-economic structure. This was a basic idea in Lundvall (1992) where
3 The listing echoes Denison’s ‘growth accounting’ exercises where attempts were made to reduce the
relative size of the ‘residual’. It has in common with such efforts a certain agnostic approach where all
factors are treated as equally important and without systematically linking them to each other. In this sense
it is a move toward less theory rather than more theory. This is reflected in the disturbing lack of
consistency in the list, i.e. the heterogeneous character of its elements. This way of defining innovation
systems actually exaggerates what we do not know and defers from drawing upon what we do know
regarding innovation.

10

it was emphasized that what you do (as reflected in the economic structure – the
presence of industrial sectors) will reflect what you know which, in turn, will be
reflected in what you learn. This starting point is of fundamental importance for
developing countries since it opens up the possibility to manipulate the pattern of
specialisation so that the rate of learning and competence-building is high.
2. The definition also specifies that competence building is the other side of the
process of innovation. Sometimes ‘learning’ is used to refer mainly to passive
adaptation to changing circumstances. We see the creation of capabilities in firms
and the formation of competences among people as important outcomes of
processes of “active” learning.
3. Finally, and this is very important, the definition specifies that innovation is
rooted not only in science-based learning but also in experience based learning
(broad definition of innovation systems)

It is true that the sets of ‘organisations and its relationships, institutions and socio-
economic structures’ that are evoked by this definition are very broad indeed. We need to

take into account aspects of education and training, social policies that underpin social
capital and interactive learning as well as the functioning of labour markets and the
organisation of firms. At this point we need to consider Edquist’s critical remark that
‘Within a geographical area the whole socio-economic system cannot, of course, be
considered to be included in the SI.’ (op. cit. p.200). This common sense remark might
not be correct, however. The point is that we look at each of these elements from a
specific perspective – how they contribute to innovation and competence building.
Alternatively we might therefore define the innovation system as a focusing device to be
applied to the national economy and contrast it with the focusing device offered by
neoclassical economics:
‘the (national/regional/sectoral) innovation system is a focusing device aiming at
analyzing and understanding processes of innovation (rather than allocation) where
agents interact and learn (rather than engage in rational choice). The aim of using
this device is to find out which alternative institutional and organizational set-ups

11

support stronger dynamic performance of a (national/regional) economy or a
sector.’

The basic underlying proposition is that the form and content of organizations,
institutions and socio-economic structures that appear as most attractive when we focus
upon economic change and agents that learn will not be the same as when the focus is
upon allocation of existing resources on the basis of rational agents. It is also taken into
account that while different institutional set-ups may be more or less efficient there is no
single ‘optimal’ way to organize a national or regional economy. As we shall argue
below, this proposition is true everywhere. But it is not least true in the context of a
developing country. It follows from this that while the interest in the impact of
technology on growth is in common the theoretical core of national innovation studies is
incompatible with New Growth Theory based on revised neoclassical assumptions.
2.2. National, regional or sectoral innovation systems? – Different levels of
aggregation
The focus of Freeman’s unpublished OECD-paper from 1982 where the concept ‘national
innovation system’ appeared for the first time was on how countries could build
knowledge and knowledge infrastructure at the national level with the aim to promote
economic development and international competitiveness. A key reference in the paper
was to Friedrich List (1842) and his concept ‘the national system of production’. Freeman
pointed out that List was concerned that applying Adam Smith’s invisible hand and his
‘cosmopolitan’ strategy would leave countries that were less developed than Great
Britain permanently and increasingly behind. List pointed to the need for national
governments to be active and build infrastructure and invest in knowledge. In this context
he argued that the most important form of capital was neither physical nor financial – it
was ‘mental’ – today we would call it ‘intellectual’. He also pointed to the need to protect
‘infant industries’ until they could became strong enough to compete on equal terms with
firms from England.

12

To the extent that a major concern of many developing countries today is to bring about
economic transformation and catch up with the developed world the innovation system
perspective as proposed by List should be directly applicable to the reality of developing
countries. But there has been some scepticism among scholars who have worked in the
tradition of development economics (Lall 1992, Viotti 2001, Matthews 1999 and others)
who argue that building technical capabilities and to promote learning are legitimate
concerns while ‘innovation’ sets the goal too high for less developed countries. And it
has also been argued that there is no full-blown ‘system’ of innovation in a less
developed country that can be studied. Rather the task is to develop strategies to create
such a system (Arocena and Sutz, 2000).
Nonetheless, more and more, national governments in developing countries refer to
national (and regional) innovation systems as a framework for designing national (and
regional) development strategies. The most important recent example is China where the
new long term plan for science and technology explicitly points out that the plan has been
designed on the basis of a national innovation system perspective.
2.3. National innovation systems or national learning systems?
Several authors including Viotti (2002) and Matthews (1999) have argued against the use
of the concept innovation system and in favour of the concept ‘learning system’. Viotti
argues that innovation system should be reserved for developed countries where the
leading firms introduce innovations that are new for the world. In less developed
countries incremental innovation, diffusion and learning may take place but not
innovation (stricto senso). He then goes on to make a distinction between Active and
Passive learning systems using Korea and Brazil as illustrations.
While Viotti’s comparative analysis is extremely interesting and useful we do not agree
with the starting point. Much of the early work on innovation systems was developed in
connection with small countries such as Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland
(Freeman and Lundvall 1987, Lundvall 1988). These countries prosper not because their
firms develop unique new innovations for the world market but because their firms have
developed a capacity to absorb and use new technology developed elsewhere (see also

13

Fagerberg, Mowery and Verspagen 2008). Taking Viotti seriously would imply that these
countries have learning systems but not innovation systems – perhaps we would end up
with innovation systems only in the US, Japan, the UK, France and Germany
One reason why Viotti wishes to reserve the innovation system for those countries that
develop radically new technology is that he finds the use of ‘innovation process’ as
covering both original development, diffusion and use of new technology too vague. But
to find out where new ideas originate from is not always easy and from the point of view
of economic performance it is less important than understanding how they are diffused
and used. As Chris Freeman puts it: despite similarly large investments in R&D by
various industrialized and semi-industrialized countries starting in the 1950’s and 60’s
“evidence accumulated that the rate of technical change and of economic growth
depended more on efficient diffusion than on being first in the world with radical
innovations and as much on social innovations as on technical innovations” (Freeman,
1995, p. 10).
Therefore it is important to assess to what degree the original set of ideas developed
around the concept of national system of innovation are valid in relation to less developed

countries operating in a globalising context. As we shall see the scepticism is well-
founded when we operate with narrow definitions of innovation and innovation systems

but not when we operate with the broad understanding as it was presented in the founding
work by Christopher Freeman and the Aalborg-school (Freeman 1987, Lundvall 1992).
Finally, we would like to stress that in all innovation systems technical change and
economic growth at the national level are the outcome of what innovative activities that
take place in the whole population of firms. Having a long tail of slow adopters and a few
world leading firms may be less attractive than having many firms that are quick adopters
without any world leaders. The performance of the national innovation system will reflect
technical and organisational change in the industrial system as a whole and therefore
there is no reason why we should promote world leadership rather than quick follower
strategies. Big countries such as Brasil, India and China may for different reasons have
aspirations to become world leaders in specific technologies - for instance in order to

14

avoid technological dependence when it comes to what the US may define as ‘strategic
technologies’ but for most countries this is not the best way to promote competitiveness
and growth.
4

2.4. The informal and formal dimension of innovation systems
There is a strong bias in theory as in policy to focus upon what can be easily measured
and to neglect what appears to be impossible or difficult to measure. The core of any
standard study of (national) innovation systems will thus contain data on R&D-efforts
and patents. If data based upon innovation surveys are accessible these might be added
but most policy makers seem to remain reluctant to go outside the traditional data sets
relating to R&D (Arundel 2006).
Institutions and policies studied are mainly those directly or indirectly related to R&D
activities sometimes inspired by triple helix concept and since it is more easy to measure
the performance of single firms and knowledge infrastructure organisations the ‘quality
of relationships’ between them is normally not captured by the analysis.
This is problematic since the elements of the innovation system that have the most
important impact upon the learning capacity of the whole system may be informal and
difficult to measure. Based on Schoser (1999) we distinguish not only between what
might be included in narrow and broad definitions of innovation systems but also
between formal and informal elements and relationships. In Table 1 we have included
some examples of elements considered in each field.
Table 1. Interaction between formal and informal elements of the innovation system

Narrow Broad5

4 If Viotti had come up with the proposed terminology 25 years ago it might have been worth considering.
It might have helped avoid the current bias toward science-based learning. It is obvious that many policy
makers and analysts attach to innovation the same narrow meaning as Viotti. The result has been that
references to national innovation systems have been used to promote science in general or to impose
market governance on universities. Now it is too late to change the vocabulary: The innovation system has
become part of policy language world-wide – what is needed now is to re-conquer the concept and bring it
back to what was intended with it 25 years ago.
5 Includes the organizations and networks included in the narrow concept of IS as well

15

Formal (1)
Science& Technology
organizations, institutions and
formal networks

(2)

Organizations supporting innovation in
general, institutions
& formal networks

Informal (3)

S&T informal institutions
and informal networks

(4)

Informal institutions influencing
innovation and informal networks (like
cultural and historical values)

Source: Adapted from Schoser (1991)

The functioning of universities and research institutions, patents and publications or
technology policy and programs are examples of components of the formal and narrow
innovation systems. The educational and financial system, the environmental competition
and policy or the labor market are other organizations and institutions to be included in
the broad and formal definition of the innovation system.
On the other hand, elements such as the willingness of firms to cooperate with scientific
institutions or the closeness of relationships between companies and technology policy
might be considered as part of the informal and narrow system of innovation; while the
quality of the relationships between customers and suppliers, the degree of trust in the
society or the values of the educational system are informal items to be considered under
the broad definition of innovation systems.
So far the focus of innovation system research and innovation policy has been on formal
elements and narrow definitions. But the mode of innovation as well as the performance
of the system will reflect that the narrow and broad systems as well as the formal and
informal systems are extremely interdependent For example:
1. The efficiency of efforts taking place in the formal narrow system (1) will reflect
the informal narrow system (3). For example, interactive learning across
organisations as well as learning within organisations will depend upon ‘informal
cognitive and behavioural patterns in the innovation processes.

16

2. The informal narrow system (3) will be rooted in the informal broad system (4).
For example, the business culture will reflect the broader pattern of ‘cultural and
historical factors’.
3. Cultural and historical factors (4) will in the long term be influenced by changes
in the formal broad system (2). Here we would add agrarian reform, democratic
education systems, more or less egalitarian income distribution, transparency, rule
of law, social policies compensating victims of change and policies restricting
corruption and ethnical conflict.
The Nordic countries – especially Norway and Denmark – ought to be handicapped by
small size and by a rather weak knowledge base. Their record in terms of radical
innovation is also weak. The fact that their economies have performed well in terms of
economic growth has more to do with the causalities referred to above. They are
outstanding in absorbing ideas from abroad and to some degree this has to do with the
educational level. But the high level of generalised trust is also important. The high level
of trust in the Nordic economies has to do with agrarian reform, democratic education
systems, egalitarian income distribution, social policy, transparency, rule of law and
policies restricting corruption and ethnical conflict. And empirics show that the high level
of trust is reflected in more frequent inter-firm interaction in innovation processes as well
as in a much broader participation in processes of change within firms. This specific
mode of innovation is especially supportive for learning and absorption of new
technology.
The reality of most developing countries is far away from the Nordic model. But,
nonetheless, it might be the case that strong efforts to upgrade the formal narrow system
will prove to be without major effect without upgrading aspects of the informal part. The
fact that Korea succeeded both with agrarian reform and with building an all
encompassing education system may have been crucial for creating the informal basis
that supported its narrow innovation system. Democratising working life and building a
welfare state may be important next steps for Korea. In less developed countries offering
general access to modest forms of education, health service and food for all children

17

without regard of social and ethnical origin might be a kind of reform that would
contribute to generalised trust that can spill over to the innovation system.
This implies that innovation research needs to develop new tools and indicators to
analyse and capture difficult slippery concepts such as ‘social capital’ and ‘generalised
trust’. It also implies that ‘innovation policy’ needs to be anchored not in one single
ministry but rather at the very top of the government and in strategic bodies aiming at
building sustained learning at all levels of the economy.

3. Development economics
Several authors point to the paper by Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) in Economic Journal as
marking the beginning of development economics as a sub-discipline in economics. It
was followed by major contributions came in the fifties (Dobb 1951, Singer 1952, Nurkse
1953, Lewis 1954, Hirschman 1958) but the analysis was far from unified. There were
heated debates regarding balanced versus imbalanced growth as well as between Marxists
such as Dobb and Baran (1957) and more liberal economists such as Lewis.
Nonetheless there was some common ground for most of the economists taking part in
the debate. Using inspiration from Keynesian growth models and from Marxian theory of
capitalist accumulation it was argued that an increase in the rate of investment was
necessary in order to raise the rate of growth. The analysis of Lewis demonstrating the
dramatic differences in productivity between traditional informal sectors and agriculture
on the one hand and manufacturing on the other hand saw the transfer of labour from the
low productive sectors to the high productive ones as an important prerequisite for
sustained growth.
Most of the development economists were in favour of import substitution and saw the
role of the state as protector of infant industries as legitimate and necessary. This was
based upon a certain pessimism regarding the potential for manufacturing exports – a

18

pessimism that had real background in the period 1950-70 when most of the growth in
international trade took place within the OECD-area (Waterbury 1999).
Less than forty years after Rosenstein-Rodan’s seminal article first Hirschman (1981) and
then Amartya Sen (1983) recognised that the era of development economics based upon
this common ground had come to a close. Hirschman pointed out that the development
economists had overestimated the power of their ideas to overcome underdevelopment
and also that there had been lack of respect for the emotions and culture of those who
were expected to realise their ideas.
Amartya Sen recognised that the position of development economics had been weakened.
But he argued that their basic ideas had not been refuted by what had actually happened.
Those countries that have had success in catching-up actually followed most of the
advice given by the classical development economists. Specifically, while growth in
some of these countries became export-led it did so after periods of import substitution
that created the basis for the new export industries.
But the pro-market neo-liberal criticism of Keynesianism and of state-intervention had a
major impact on all sub-disciplines in economics and it was especially devastating for
development economics. There are different interpretations of what went wrong for
development economics. One interesting proposal comes from Noble Prize Winner in
economics Paul Krugman (1995) who argues that the main reason was not political but
the fact that the protagonists could not present their argument in a language that the
mainstream in economics could understand. (Not surprisingly Krugman indicates that
with the arrival of new trade and new growth theory the situation now has changed).
Amartya Sen’s article is especially interesting because while it may be seen as closing
one era of research he also opens up new avenues for research by presenting his ideas
about capabilities and freedoms as indicators of development. He argues that what
matters for people is not so much what they own or earn as it is what they experience and
are able to do. Owning a bicycle without roads or belonging to a culture or a gender
where biking is not permitted is of limited value, as Box 2 illustrates with the example of
China.

19
Box 2. Economic growth and welfare in China
The development in China after Amartya Sen’s article was published has
illustrated both the relevance of traditional developmental economics and the
need to make a distinction between growth and welfare. First it is obvious that
the most important driver of economic growth in China is the very high rate of
capital accumulation. And there is little doubt that government policies have
been instrumental in establishing this process. China did not follow the
classical doctrine of import substitution since there was a bold opening of the
economy for imports of both commodities and foreign capital. This is where
China now indicates that there might be a need to protect the building of
domestic competencies that make it possible to develop ‘independent
innovation’ (Gu et al 2008).
Second, the divergence between indicators of economic growth and indicators
of capabilities and well-being – including access to education and health
services as well as to clean air and water – have been quite dramatic in China.
Again the government is aware of the problem and it is now referring to
‘harmonious growth’ as what should be aimed at in the future (Gu and
Lundvall 2006b). This implies concern about regional imbalances and about
social and ecological sustainability. The case of China is especially important
since the outstanding economic growth of China is the single development that
makes it possible to argue that globalisation has contributed to increased global
equality (Wade 2005). It is not obvious that a calculation of global inequality
on the basis of ‘capabilities’ would end up with the same result.

After the demise of the ‘classical developments economics’ followed a period where
economic development was analysed with the use of tools of standard economics6
.
Market failure was analysed with the most advanced tools from information economics.
Advanced game theory was applied to manifold situations. But in both cases the
analytical work gave few useful insights. The almost unlimited room for model

6 The following is based upon material from a seminar held at in October 2005 where development scholars
(Mookherjee 2005, Basu 2005, Banerjee 2005) made a critical assessment of their field of research.

20

specifications resulted in contradictory conclusions regarding policy. To quote Dilip
Mookherjee: the result was “an embarrassment of riches when it comes to the choice of a
theoretical model for almost any phenomenon” (Op.cit. 2005).
This was the background for the strong move toward econometrics and evidence-based
public policy that is still reigning the discipline. Today almost all research in mainstream
development economics is empirical and it is driven by the use of increasingly advanced
econometric models. ‘The key problems confronted by a typical empirical paper today
concerns the various possible econometric biases’ (Op cit 2005). Specific new techniques
such as the use of ‘instruments’ for potentially endogenous regressors and ‘randomised
controlled experiments’ that can be used to inspire public policy (much in the spirit of
research in medicine) are regarded as constituting the frontline of research.
But Dilip Mookherjee who was the author of the central paper to which the other scholars
added their reflections at the 2005-occasion referred to in foot-note 5 - and most of the
others contributing to the debate - was not completely happy with the current content and
style of research. Mookherjee’s paper had the following title ‘Is there too little theory in
development economics today?’ and his answer to this question is yes. While he and
others recognise that there has been important progress in the econometrics they worry
that ‘Research papers tend to get evaluated almost exclusively in terms of their success in
combating econometric problems often to the exclusion of the importance of the context
or issues addressed by the analysis, the imaginativeness of the underlying hypotheses
formulated or tested, or the importance of the findings from a wider standpoint’ (op cit).
The general impression from this debate is first that the admirable open-mindedness and
capacity to engage in self-critical assessment shown by Mookherje and the other
participants in the seminar. Second it is that currently mainstream economics tends to use
developing countries’ problems as offering interesting opportunities to make use of
advanced theoretical models and econometric tools while the interest in understanding

21

the structures that lie behind underdevelopment and the mechanisms that might trigger
development tend to end up as being of secondary importance.7
4. Linking innovation system research to development economics
4.1. The contribution of innovation system research to development economics
Mookherjee and the other participants in the debate pleaded for more emphasis on
theoretical work and specifically they pointed to several important issues where there is a
need to develop theory:
1. Interaction of economic processes with political institutions and norms.
2. Replacing traditional assumptions regarding rationality with behavioural models.
3. Endogenous evolution of preferences in public policy.
4. Theories of institutions that relate them to specific community characteristics.
5. Firm heterogeneity.

6. Problem solving in interaction with others in which our ends and means co-
evolve, with ends discovered and transformed in the process.

7. Need to go beyond methodological individualism and rational choice.
Most of the issues proposed are actually at the core of evolutionary economics, including
heterogeneity of agents and agents that learn in an interaction with each other resulting in
a transformation of their preferences. Nonetheless it is striking that the role of
knowledge, competence building and innovation in the development process are for the
most part not explicitly addressed in these calls for new research. The issues addressed by
the micro-studies referred to as examples are quite specific. They relate for instance to
the optimal use of markets when it comes to distribute of malaria nets or of the impact on
7 One of the most interesting contributions to the debate comes from Basu who points out that the idea that
the only form for truly reliable knowledge comes from ‘randomised controlled experiments’ is absurd since
it implies that all that we have learnt through other forms of ‘experience’ is irrelevant.

22

learning of the use of flipcharts in education. There are considerations of factor markets
but little on how those support innovation and competence building.
The innovation system approach implies that the very focus of the analysis should be on
the creation, diffusion and use of knowledge seen both as information and competence.
Getting markets to allocate existing resources efficiently is important but it is not what
drives economic development. Both markets and other institutions need to be assessed
according to how they affect the competence of people and the capacity of organisations.
Therefore the focus of the analysis should be on economic structures and institutions that
support competence building among people and capacity building in organisations.
Public policies should be designed in such a way that they get structures and institutions
right.
There are at least three classical and highly politicized issues that go through the debates
in development economics. The first is on the role of governments versus markets. The
second is about free trade and the openness of the market. The third is about
industrialization as a necessary step toward modernization.
We would argue that the innovation system approach has a potential to throw new light
on these issues. One of those that insists that it is fundamental for developing countries to
get their trade specialization right is Erik Reinert (2006). There is a great potential in
developing the analysis of sectoral innovation systems with focus upon the potential for
learning and competence building in different sectors, including not only activities from
agriculture and manufacturing but also service sectors. Such studies should also take into
account knowledge related linkages established between sectors. A major problem here
might be to find the right level of aggregation since sectors, as they are defined in
production and trade statistics, are quite heterogeneous and it is a challenge to group
activities that have commonalities in terms of their learning dynamics.
With regards to the openness of the economy, many innovation system scholars tend to
support the view of Lewis: while there is a great potential for learning from abroad in
global value chains or through inward foreign direct investments the actual positive
impact will depend on the indigenous ‘absorptive capacity’.

23

The role of the state is at the very centre of political disagreements. While it is obvious
that government initiatives were crucial for shaping the growth dynamics in countries like
China (Gu and Lundvall, 2006a and Gu et al, 2008) or India, it is also obvious that most
studies stress the need for governments to withdraw and give more space for private
initiative. The debate is put in general and rather sharp terms by Tilman Altenburg (2008)
and by Cimoli et al (2008). While Altenburg emphasizes government failure Cimoli et al
criticize the assumption that ‘markets’ are the most natural institutions in the economy
and they see active industrial policy as necessary for the promotion of economic
development.
4.2. The contribution of development economics to innovation system research
Innovation system research may draw lessons from the fate of classical development
economics and not the least from the reflections made by Hirschman and Sen at the end
of the era. Hirschman pointed out that there was an element of arrogance in the work
assuming that the development economists as outsiders could dictate rational behaviour
on central actors, without considering the culture and passions of those directly
concerned. One way to overcome this problem is to strengthen the competence and
research capacity in the field of innovation systems and development economics within
the developing countries. Globelics, Asialics and Cicalics are networks that have this as
their major aim. Similar initiatives are under way in India and within Africa.
The major message from Amartya Sen’s work over the past decades (Sen, 1983, 1999) is
that growth in the material assets is not equivalent with growth in welfare and well-being.
This may be seen as recognition that ‘classical development economics’ had a tendency
to see growth as identical to development. Research on innovation and competence
building should learn from this mistake. Not least it is clear that the current development
in China illustrates the need to have a broader understanding of development that takes
into account social and ecological consequences of growth strategies. One intuitive way
to indicate such a broader perspective is to link development to different kinds of
‘capital’.

24

Table 2: Resources fundamental for economic growth – combining the tangible and
reproducible dimensions

Easier to produce,
reproduce or use

Not easy to produce or
reproduce

Tangible resources 1. Production capital 2. Natural capital

Intangible resources 3. Knowledge capital8 4. Social capital

The table illustrates that economic growth is faced with a double challenge in terms of
sustainability and that there is an imminent risk of undermining the basis of material
production. In China pollution of water and air threatens the reproduction of tangible
capital. We will argue that the production and efficient use of intellectual capital is
fundamentally depending upon social capital. In a successful learning economy rooted in
social cohesion and trust it is easier to engage in interactive and apprenticeship learning
resulting in the passing on of elements of tacit knowledge from individual to individual
and from generation to generation. This is more difficult in a context without trust and
with long distance among professions and in hierarchies. Thus, undermining trust and
social capital undermines the reproduction and use of intellectual capital. A development
strategy that focuses only on production capital and intellectual capital is not sustainable.
Finally we see a great potential in linking Sen’s analysis of individual ‘capabilities’ to the
analysis of innovation systems. In our view the most important of all capabilities is the
capability to learn. This capability is fundamental for all the other capabilities and it is the
one that will shape the dynamics of welfare. To put it crudely economic development is
about enhancing capability and opportunity to learn at all levels. Technological learning
8 It is important to highlight that our point here is not that knowledge is easy to reproduce but that if we do
not combine it with other dimensions (like social capital – much more difficult to reproduce) the production
and dissemination of knowledge (particularly of a tacit nature) will be severely hampered.

25

is fundamentally important but so is the social and political learning that is necessary to
build institutions and policy strategies that support competence building.
According to Krugman (1995), the classical development economics disappeared because
the protagonists could not speak the language of the mainstream economists – they could
not transform their ideas into mathematical models9

. What can we learn from this for
innovation system research? There are rich possibilities to build economic models and
pursue econometrics with reference to innovation system research. But we need to think
differently in several important respects. First, at the micro level, we need indicators that
reflect the quality of relationships such as trust and we need to understand how this
quality comes out of ‘problem solving in interaction with others in which our ends and
means co-evolve’ and we also need indicators for what is learnt in such interactions
between individuals and organisations.
At the aggregate level we need to take into account that national, regional and sectoral
systems are much more diverse than individual beings. Therefore we might not aim at
general theories about what is the best practise for developing countries and try to apply
that globally. But neither is it satisfactory to pursue individual case studies and to assume
that results can be generalised to other systems – this is actually one of the major
complaints against the micro-analysis based upon controlled randomisation.
An intermediary approach would be to use methods that make it possible to group
systems in ‘families’ on the basis of certain commonalities and then to look for the
underlying structures within each family. It might be more meaningful to pursue
comparative econometric analysis within Latin America and Asia rather than to include
countries from both continents.
5. So, which way now?
There are many different paths to follow for future research on innovation systems and
economic development. The fact that there is a lot of overlap and interaction between
9 Krugman’s analysis might be too kind to the standard economics community however. In order to remain
within the neoclassical community you might also need to confess to a certain credo that includes
methodological individualism, rational choice, general equilibrium as reference and markets as the most
natural elements in the economy.

26

analysis of innovation systems at different levels of aggregation and that the field, while
anchored in socio-economics, has been open for interdisciplinary collaboration is a major
strength. It makes it more relevant than mainstream development economics where there
is little feed-back between and micro and macro approaches and where disciplines
outside economics are regarded with disdain. Several of the issues raised below will
require interdisciplinary efforts.
5.1. What is development?
A first priority might be to give a more clear meaning to ‘development’ and to understand
better how it relates to economic growth. Sen’s capability approach constitutes a kind of
micro-foundation for a theory about development. We believe that it might be possible to
develop a macro theory of development by combining Adam Smith economic perspective
and the extension of the division of labour with George Herbert Meads’ interactionist
perspective. According to Mead ‘civilisation’ grows out of extending who is defined as a
‘significant other’ and he refers to the spread of markets and religion as forces that
extends communities from village, to region, to nation etc. This may correspond to a
transformation of social capital establishing more ‘generalized trust’.
Another important dimension of development that is not fully reflected in Sen’s
capabilities refers to learning and autonomy at the workplace. Economic development has
been linked to industrialisation. And this is a process where farmers engaged in simple
work are brought into factories with taylorist working conditions. After an immediate
period of drastic cultural adaptation the room for learning is limited. This may be
contrasted with the patterns in the most developed economies. Here only a small
proportion of the workforce has taylorist (less than 10% in the Scandinavian countries) or
simple (less than 20%) jobs. The rest are engaged in problem solving where they learn
new things (Lorenz and Valeyre 2005). What people do and what they learn in their daily
work is fundamental for the structuring of society and we would propose that researchers
should pay more attention to this dimension of innovation systems. Combining different
forms of learning correlates with innovation performance (Arundel et al 2007) and at the
same time it may be used as an important indicator for economic development.

27

Deepening our understanding of the factors affecting development is another fundamental
venue for research, particularly understanding the role of institutions in development. The
interaction between social inclusion, governance, adequate business environment and
development, capability building and innovation needs to be fully understood. This is an
important research venue in which researchers in innovation systems might shed some
light.
5.2. Innovation, Inequality and development
In the last Globelics conference (Mexico, 2008) one of the key themes of the conference
was the relationship between innovation and inequality. Of special interest in the context
of innovation system perspective would be the inequality in accessing learning (Lundvall
1996). Innovation may be seen as part of a process of creative destruction and while some
specific sectors and locations may benefit from it others may get worse off. Some of the
most successful economies in the world have developed welfare states that tax the
winners and compensate the losers by offering them some basic security in processes of
change. Research might highlight the potential for building embryonic welfare states that
fulfil such functions.
In general it is important to get a better understanding of how income distribution, social
cohesion and generalised trust relate to each other as well as to economic processes
including interactive learning, networking and innovation. Such research might end up
showing that there are different development paths and different modes of innovation
where some operate with high degrees of inequality while others build upon social
cohesion. Such studies may be helpful in showing that there are alternative policy
strategies for developmental states.
5.3. Understanding knowledge and learning
One important challenge for innovation system analysis both in the more and the less
developed parts of the world is to deepen the understanding of how different kinds of
knowledge are created and used in the process of innovation. Some elements of
knowledge are local and tacit, embodied in people and embedded in organizations. Other

28

elements are global, explicit and can easily be transferred from one part of the world to
another.
While information in principle can move freely from one part of the world to another
through the use of telecommunication technologies, competence is embodied in people or
embedded in organisations or even in institutions. But even in the case of information the
capacity to understand and use it may be very demanding. The geographical distribution
of people with the background necessary to make use of scientific information is
extremely unevenly distributed and actually today the forces attracting the scientific elite
to a limited number of places (such as the universities in Berlin, Paris, Oxford,
Cambridge, Harvard, MIT, Stanford etc.) are strong.
To understand how learning takes place within organizations as well as in the interaction
between organizations is key to comprehend how systems of innovation work. While it is
important to study national characteristics in terms of organisations that pursue R&D, it is
equally important to understand national characteristics in terms of how firms interact

with customers and to what degree different firms give employees access to competence-
building in connection with on-going economic activities.

One major challenge for research is to develop concepts that can be transformed into
measurable indicators. Human capital measurements may represent formal investment in
education but what people learn at the workplace or as consumers is not easy to capture
through standard measurements. The absence of indicators makes the area less visible for

policy makers and this contributes to a bias in innovation policy toward promoting STI-
rather than DUI-activities.

5.4. Innovation systems, institutions and entrepreneurship
To understand how learning takes place it is fundamental to understand the role of
institutions. So far most innovation system research has paid attention only to formal

institutions or organizations while informal institutions such as culture, customs, time-
horizon etc. are often ignored. Some exceptions are Lundvall (Lundvall 1992, Lundvall et

al. 2006), Johnsson (Johnsson et al. 2003) or Oyelaran-Oyeyinka (2006). This is much in

29

line with Business systems research, varieties of capitalism research and the early
intercultural communication research represented by authors like Hofstede (1991).
Understanding institutions and the role they play in innovation and development is an
issue that deserves more attention by researchers.
Equally central is the conceptualization of the role of entrepreneurs. Despite the centrality
of the entrepreneur in the initial work by Schumpeter on innovation (1934, 1939, 1942),
innovation system researchers are yet to provide adequate attention towards evolving an
institutionally grounded theory of entrepreneurship. It is worth exploring the linkages
between national innovation styles and the essentially non-institutional entrepreneurship
literature drawing on Burt’s structural holes and maybe even Kirzner’s analysis of the
entrepreneur as an ‘equilibrium’ creator. It is important to sort out different
conceptualisations of entrepreneurship. Some developing countries are leading the world
in terms of the frequency of start up firms but suffer from too little entrepreneurship
initiative within existing firms. Bringing in the perspective of ‘collective
entrepreneurship’ might open up more fruitful directions for research.

5.5. National, international, sectoral and regional dimensions
Since the national level appears as central in the innovation system approach it is
important to analyse the role of the nation state both as a political cultural phenomenon
and as a territorial concept. There is little doubt that nation states have played a key role
in mobilising resources and not least as frameworks for building competence through
education. For good reasons ‘nationalism’ has got itself a bad reputation in the history of
mankind but it might be difficult to establish the necessary developmental effort without
some common purpose and here the nation has been an important option. But nation
states are very different constructs in terms of the degree of size, heterogeneity and
inequality. One priority is to specify the conditions for nation states to become

30

developmental and at the opposite end to explain why some nation states appear to be
failed states (Wade 2005).
Another priority is to understand how the different forms of opening of national and
regional economies contribute to or hinder economic development. While the emergence
of global value chains as well as the formation of global champions opens up the national
and regional systems of innovation it is not obvious that the process makes them less
important as a framework for economic development. To understand what capabilities
and institutions that need to be established in order to benefit from different forms of
international openness is fundamental.
Innovation systems in developing countries are heterogeneous. Often modern sectors
making use of advanced technology co-exist with informal sectors characterised by
underemployment, low productivity and stagnation. In the classical development
economics development was seen as moving labour from the primitive to the modern
sector. This is still an important issue. But more research is needed to find out if there is
room also for building modern activities more directly within informal sectors and for
creating stronger links between the two types of sectors. Here the sectoral system
approach may play a key role in pointing to cases where such strategies have been
successful and to specify the mechanisms at work.
Innovation systems in developing countries are heterogeneous also in terms of the
geography of competence and knowledge. The modern activities are often concentrated
in regional industrial clusters and they draw upon local knowledge infrastructure as well
as on international sources of knowledge. To pursue research that compares and contrasts
different regional systems of innovation within major emerging economies such as India
and China may be the best way to understand the specificities of innovation systems.
Developing analysis of how the degree of integration of such regional systems in the
overall local economy, including activities in the informal sector may inspire industrial
and regional policy.
5.6. Dynamics of innovation systems

31

Notwithstanding the clear links between innovation system research and evolutionary
economics, understanding the dynamics of different innovation systems and different
evolution paths still remains a major research challenge in innovation system research,
particularly when dealing with developing countries.
From an evolutionary perspective, innovation systems in developing countries can
generally be characterized as emergent innovation systems as opposed to the well
functioned matured innovation systems of developed countries (Chaminade and Vang,
2008). Understanding what determines the emergence of a system of innovation and how
a system evolves over time is a major research challenge, both for academics and for
policy makers. The lack of indicators that capture innovation and learning processes over
time is a very important limitation for researchers interested in this line of research, that
can only be overcome working in parallel with the development of longitudinal data sets
and new indicators to capture the more informal aspects of innovation systems mentioned
earlier.

Another great challenge is to understand the dynamics between institutions, the socio-
economic context and the ability of firms and other organizations to engage in interactive

learning and capability accumulation and its changes over time.

6. Corollary – Possible research strategies
How to organise research in the future? What are the specific circumstances for doing
research on innovation systems particularly in developing countries? What kind of
information can be gathered in research and what kind of research is most worthwhile to
pursue?
One way of organizing research might be rather big national projects with a 2-5 year time
horizon dominated by local scholars but integrating international experts, including
experts from other developing countries. Such a big project may combine data from the
micro-level of the single firm, with data on inter-firm cooperation and interaction with

32

knowledge structure with analysis of institutions shaping finance, labour markets and
education systems. Within such a framework comparisons between regions taking into
account their openness to other regions as well as the international openness would be
very relevant.
Another way would be systemic comparative analysis of systems of innovation across
countries, regions and industries. Most research on systems of innovation is based on the
analysis of one national innovation system, sectoral or regional. While individual analysis
are useful to understand the evolution of an innovation system over time, the systematic
comparative analysis of different systems across similar dimensions might help to
identify similarities as well as differences in innovation systems. We cannot fully grasp
what are the differences between the agro processing system of innovation and the ICT if
we do not compare the same sectoral innovation systems across countries or regions.
Only then we will be able to identify what are the sectoral specific elements that hold
across countries or regions.
Often statistics will be lacking and major systematic surveys may be difficult to pursue in
a developing country. A good starting point is to contact some experienced people from
business, public sector, trade unions and research and interview them about the problems
to be analysed. This might lead scholars to other experts and at the end of such an
opening round hypotheses about barriers for change as well as unexploited opportunities
may be formulated. A wider set of agents may be called upon to qualify the hypotheses
and on this basis it might be possible to design questionnaires and rather specific quests
for data. This strategy takes as its starting point that there is valid knowledge based upon
experience and that this knowledge should be used. It also has the advantage of building
up a set of advanced users of the results of the project.
One problem with such strategies is that the incentive structure in current academic life
does not promote this kind of research. As mentioned before in the connection with the
new wave of statistics in developmental economics what matters most when it comes to
get published is the elegant use of advanced tools. Since scholars in developing countries
are rewarded mainly on the basis of publications in international journals they need to

33

adjust to this reality. On the other hand the big project mentioned here constitutes an ideal
training ground for Ph.D.-students. But without major backing from outside the academic
community the chance to establish and pursue such projects is small.
The road ahead is long but very stimulating and challenging. We are faced with many
research challenges and unanswered research questions. But there is a growing
community of researchers in innovation systems and development. Networks such as
Globelics, Asialics or Cicalics provide a good platform for researchers around the world
to exchange ideas, build large projects and contribute to our understanding of innovation
systems in developing countries.